Installation and Setup
======================

Dependencies
------------

QISKit ACQUA Chemistry is built upon QISKit ACQUA.
Like QISKit ACQUA, at least `Python 3.5 or
later <https://www.python.org/downloads/>`__ is needed to use QISKit
ACQUA Chemistry. In addition, `Jupyter
Notebook <https://jupyter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html>`__ is
recommended for interacting with the tutorials. For this reason we
recommend installing the `Anaconda
3 <https://www.continuum.io/downloads>`__ Python distribution, as it
comes with all of these dependencies pre-installed.


Code Installation
-----------------

We encourage you to install QISKit ACQUA Chemistry via the pip tool (a
Python package manager):

.. code:: sh

   pip install qiskit-acqua-chemistry

pip will handle all dependencies automatically (including the dependencies on QISKit ACQUA and QISKit Core). and you will always
install the latest (and well-tested) release version.

We recommend using Python virtual environments to improve your
experience.

If your intention is not so much to access QISKIT ACQUA Chemistry
as a tool to perform chemistry computations on a quantum machine, but rather to extend QISKit ACQUA Chemistry
with new research contributions --- such as new algorithms, algorithm components, input-translation operators or drivers ---
then it is advisable to clone both the
`QISKit ACQUA Chemistry <https://github.com/QISKit/qiskit-acqua-chemistry>`__ and
`QISKit ACQUA <https://github.com/QISKit/qiskit-acqua>`__ Git repositories in order
to have easier access to the source code of the various components.

Jupyter Notebooks and input files for QISKit ACQUA Chemistry are included as part of the
`QISKit ACQUA Tutorials <https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/QISKit/qiskit-acqua-tutorials/blob/master/index.ipynb>`__.

Installation of Chemistry Drivers
---------------------------------

To run chemistry experiments on various molecules, you will also need to install one of the supported
classical computational chemistry programs, or *drivers*,
interfaced by QISKit ACQUA Chemistry.
Currently, QISKit ACQUA Chemistry comes with built-in interfaces for four drivers:

1. `Gaussian™ 16 <http://gaussian.com/gaussian16/>`__, a commercial chemistry program
2. `PSI4 <http://www.psicode.org/>`__, an open-source chemistry program built on Python
3. `PySCF <https://github.com/sunqm/pyscf>`__, an open-source Python chemistry program
4. `PyQuante <http://pyquante.sourceforge.net/>`__, a pure cross-platform open-source Python chemistry program

While the logic to
interface these drivers is supplied as part of the QISKit ACQUA Chemistry installation, the dependent chemistry programs
need to be installed separately.  This can be done by following the `instructions provided <./drivers.html>`__.
Supporting additional drivers in QISKit ACQUA Chemistry can be easily achieved by extending the ``BaseDriver`` interface.

Even without installing any of the drivers above, it is still possible to run chemistry experiments by passing
to the inout-translation layer a Hierarchical Data Format 5 (HDF5) binary file serializing the intermediate data
previously generated by one of the supported chemistry drivers.  This offers researchers the opportunity to share
chemistry input files and replicate each other's results.  Given its support to take an HDF5 files as the input to initiate a chemistry experiment,
QISKit ACQUQ Chemistry lists HDF5 as an additional driver --- in fact, the only built-in driver coming
with QISKit ACQUA Chemistry.
 
A few sample HDF5 files are provided as input files in the ``chemistry`` folder of the
`QISKit ACQUA Tutorials <https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/QISKit/qiskit-acqua-tutorials/blob/master/index.ipynb>`__.